I was recently traveling in the
highlands of New Guinea and I was
talking with a man who had three wives
and I asked him how many wives would you
like to have and was this long pause and
I thought to myself is it gonna say five
is he gonna say ten is he gonna say 25
and he leaned towards me and he
whispered
none eighty-six Christmas eighty-six
percent of human societies permit a man
to have several wives polygyny but in
the vast majority of these cultures only
about five or 10% of men actually do
have several wives having several
partners can be a toothache in fact co
wives can fight with each other
sometimes they can even poison each
other's children and you got to have a
lot of cows a lot of goats a lot of
money a lot of land in order to build a
harem we are a pair bonding species 97
percent of mammals do not pair up to
rear their young human beings do I'm not
suggesting that we're not that was
necessarily sexually faithful to our
partners I've looked at the adultery in
42 cultures I understand some of
actually the genetics of it and some of
the brain circuitry of it it's very
common around the world but we are built
to love how is technology changing love
I'm going to say almost not at all I
studied the brain I and my colleagues
have put over a hundred people into a
brain Skinner people who were just
fallen happily in love people who had
just been rejected in love and people
who are in love long term and it is
possible to remain in love long term and
I've long ago maintained that we've
evolved three distinctly different brain
systems from mating and reproduction sex
drive feelings of intense romantic love
and feelings of deep cosmic attachment
to a long-term partner and together
these three brain systems with many
other
parts of the brain orchestrate our
sexual romantic and our family lives but
they lie way below the cortex way below
the limbic system where we do our where
we feel our emotions generate our
emotions they lie in the most primitive
parts of the brain linked with energy
focus craving motivation wanting and
drive in this case the drive to win
life's greatest prize a mating partner
they evolved over 4.4 million years ago
among our first ancestors and they're
not going to change if you sweep left or
right on tinder there's no question that
technology is changing the way we court
emailing and texting emojis to express
your emotions sexting liking a
photograph selfies we're seeing new
rules and an taboos for how to court but
you know is this actually dramatically
changing in love what about the late
1940s when the automobile became very
popular and we suddenly had rolling
bedrooms how about the introduction of
the birth control pill Unchained from
the great threat of pregnancy and social
ruin women could finally express their
primitive and primal sexuality even
dating sites are not changing love
I'm chief scientific adviser to
match.com I've been it for 11 years I
keep telling them and they agree with me
that these are not dating sites they are
introducing sites when you sit down in a
bar in a coffee house on a park bench
your ancient brain snaps in action like
a sleeping cat awakened and you smile
and laugh and listen and parade the way
I do ancestors did a hundred thousand
years ago the all we can give you
various people all the dating sites can
but the only real algorithm
is your own human brain technology is
not going to change that technology is
also going to not change who you choose
to love I study the biology of
personality and I've come to believe
that we've evolved for very broad styles
of thinking and behaving linked with the
dopamine serotonin testosterone and
estrogen systems
so I created a questionnaire directly
from brain science to measure the degree
to which you express the traits the
constellation of traits linked with each
of these four brain systems I then put
that questionnaire on various match
dating sites in 40 countries 14 million
or more people have now taken the
questionnaire and I've been able to
watch who's naturally drawn to home and
as it turns out those who are very
expressive of the dopamine system they
tend to be curious creative spontaneous
energetic I would imagine there's an
awful lot of people like that in this
room they're drawn to people like
themselves curious creative people need
people like themselves people are very
expressive of the serotonin system tend
to be traditional conventional they
follow the rules they respect authority
they tend to be religious for the G ASSA
T is in the serotonin system and
traditional people go for traditional
people in that way similarity attracts
in the other two cases opposites attract
people very Express over the
testosterone system tend to be
analytical logical direct decisive and
they go for their opposite they go for
somebody who's high estrogen somebody
who's got very good verbal skills and
people skills who's very intuitive and
who's very nurturing and emotionally
expressive we have natural patterns of
make choice modern technology is not
going to change who we choose to love
but technology is producing one modern
trend that I find particularly important
it's associated with the concept of
paradox of choice millions of years we
lived in little hunting and gathering
groups it didn't have the opportunity to
choose between a thousand people on a
dating site
in fact I've been studying this recently
and I actually think there's some sort
of sweet spot in the brain and I don't
know what it is but they've apparently
from reading a lot of the data we can
embrace about five to nine alternatives
and after that you get into what
academics call cognitive overload and
you don't choose any so I've come to
think that due to this cognitive
overload we're ushering in a new form of
courtship that I call slow love I
arrived at this during my work with
match.com every year for the last six
years we've done a study called singles
in America we don't pull the max
population we pull the American
population we use a 5,000 plus people
representative sample of Americans based
on the u.s. census we got data now on
over 30,000 people and every single year
I see some of the same patterns every
single year when I asked the question
over fifty percent of people have had a
one-night stand not necessarily last
year but in their lives
fifty percent have had a friends with
benefits during the course of their
lives and over 50 percent have lived
within a person long term before
marrying Americans think that this is
reckless I have doubted that for a long
time the patterns are too strong there's
got to be some Darwinian explanation not
that many people are crazy
and so I stumbled then on a statistic
that really came home to me I was it was
a very interesting academic article in
which I found that 67% of singles in
America today who are living long term
with somebody have not yet married
because they are terrified of divorce
they are terrified of the social legal
emotional economic consequences of
divorce so it came to realize that I
don't think that this is recklessness I
think that it's caution
today's singles want to know every
single thing about a partner before they
Wed you learned a lot between the sheets
not only about how somebody makes love
but whether they're kind and whether
they can listen and at my age whether
they got a sense of humor
and in an age where we have too many
choices and we have very little fear of
pregnancy and disease
we had no feeling of shame for sex
before marriage I think people are
taking their time to love and actually
what's happening is what we're seeing is
a real expansion of the pre commitment
stage before you tie the knot where
marriage used to be the beginning of a
relationship now it's the finale but the
human brain the human brain always
triumphs and indeed in the United States
today eighty-six percent of Americans
will marry by age 49 and even in
cultures around the world where they're
not married as often they are settling
down eventually over the long-term
partner so it began to occur to me if
there's during this long extension a pre
commitment stage if you can get rid of
bad relationship before you marry maybe
we're going to see more happy marriages
so I did a study of third of 1,100
married people in America not on
match.com of course and I asked them a
lot of questions but one of the
questions was would you remarry the
person you're currently married to and
81 percent said yes in fact the greatest
change in modern romance and family life
is not technology it's not even slow
love it's actually women piling into the
job market in cultures around the world
for me in the years our ancestors lived
in little hunting and gathering groups
women commuted to work to gather their
fruits and vegetables they came home
with 60 to 80 percent of the evening
meal the double income family was the
rule and women were regarded as just as
economically socially and sexually
powerful as men then the environment
changed some 10,000 years ago we began
to settle down on the farm and both men
and women
they became obliged really to marry the
right person from the right background
from the right religion and from the
right kin and social and political
connections men's jobs became more
important they had to move
rocks fell the trees plow the land they
brought the produce up to local markets
and came home with the equivalent of
money and along with this we see a rise
of a host of beliefs the belief of
virginity at marriage arranged marriages
strictly arranged marriages the belief
that the man is the head of the
household that the wife's place is in
the home and most important honor the
husband until death do us part
these are gone they are going and in
many places they are gone we are right
now in a marriage revolution we are
shedding 10,000 years of our farming
tradition and moving forward towards
egalitarian relationships between the
sexes something that I regard as highly
compatible with the ancient human spirit
I'm not a Pollyanna that's a great deal
to cry about
I studied divorce in the 80 cultures I
studied as I say adultery and many
there's a whole pile of problems as
William Butler Yeats
the poet once said love is the crooked
thing I would add nobody gets out alive
we all have problems that in fact I
think the poet Randall Jarrell really
sums it up best he said the dark uneasy
world of family life where the greatest
can fail and the humblest succeed but I
will leave you with this love and
attachment will prevail technology
cannot change it and I will conclude by
saying that any understanding of human
relationships must take into account one
of the most powerful determinants of
human behavior the unquenchable
adaptable and primordial human drive to
love thank
thank you so much for that Helen um you
know as you know there's another speaker
here with us that works in your same
field she comes at it from a different
perspective Esther Perel is a
psychotherapist who works with couples
you study data s ter studies the stories
that couples tell her when they come to
her for help
let's have her join us on the stage
Esther
so s there when you were watching Helens
talk was there any part of it that sort
of resonated with you through the lens
of your own work that you'd like to
comment on
so it's interesting because on the one
hand the need for love is ubiquitous and
universal but the way we love the
meaning we make out of it the rules that
govern our relationships I think are
changing fundamentally when we come from
a model that until now was primarily
regulated around duty and obligation and
the needs for the collective and loyalty
and we have shifted it to a model of
free choice and individual and
individual rights and and and self
fulfillment and happiness and so that
was the first thing I thought is that
the need doesn't change but the context
and the way we regulate these
relationship changes a lot and the
paradox of choice so you know on the one
hand we relish the novelty and the
playfulness I think to be able to have
so much options and at the same time as
you talk about this cognitive overload
I see many many people who who dragged
the uncertainty and self-doubt that
comes with this Massa of choice creating
a case of FOMO and then leading us for
more fear of missed opportunity or a
fear of missing out but it's like how do
I know I have found the one the right
one so we've created what I call this
thing of stable ambiguity stable
ambiguity is when you are too afraid to
be alone but also not really willing to
engage in intimacy building it's a set
of tactics that kind of prolong the
uncertainty of a relationship but also
the uncertainty of the break-up so here
on the internet you have three major
ones
one is icing and simmering which are
great stalling tactics that offer a kind
of holding pattern that emphasize the
undefined nature of a relationship but
at the same time give you enough of a
comforting consistency and enough
freedom of the undefined boundaries yeah
and then comes ghosting and ghosting is
basically you know you disappear from
this Massa of text on the spot and you
don't have to deal with the pain that
you inflict of another because you're
making it invisible even to yourself
yeah so I was thinking I mean these
words like came up to me as you well as
I was listening to you like how a
vocabulary creates also a reality and at
the same time that's my question to you
is like do you think when the context
changes it still means that the nature
of love remains the same you study the
brain and I study people's relationships
and stories so I I think it's everything
you say plus but I don't always know the
degree to which a changing context does
it that some fine begin to change if the
meaning changes that it changes the
neither is the need clear of the entire
content Wow well
III got three points here well first of
all to your first one there's no
question about that we've changed that
we now want a personal love and that for
thousands of years we had to marry the
right person from the right background
and the right connection and in fact in
my studies of 5,000 people every year I
asked them what are you looking for and
every single year over 97% says Rose
yeah well no I mean the basic things
that over 97% of people want somebody
that respects them somebody that they
can trust and confide in somebody who
makes them laugh somebody who makes
enough time for them and somebody who
they find physically attractive to a
physically attractive that never changes
and there's certainly you know this
difference how I chord that it's like
that's not what people used to say what
is right is that they wanted somebody
with whom they give companionship
economic support children you know we
went from a production economy to a
service economy we did it in the larger
culture and we do it in marriage right
there's no question about it but it's
interesting the Millennials actually
want to be very good parents whereas the
generation above them wants to have a
very fine marriage but it's not as
focused on being a good parent I mean
you see all of these nuances you know
there's two parts basic parts of
personality
there's our culture everything you grew
up to boot do and believe and say and
there's your temperament and basically
what I've been talking about is your
temperament and that temperament is
certainly going to change with changing
times and changing beliefs and you know
and and you know that in terms of the
paradox of choice there's no question
about it that this is a pickle
I mean there were millions of years
where you found that sweet boy the other
side of the water hole and you went for
it yeah you know I'm going to say one
thing
I don't want to say one was in bottom
line is in Huntington gallery societies
they tended to have two or three
partners during the course of their
lives I mean they weren't square
I mean I'm suggesting that we do but
bottom line is you know we've always had
alternatives a mankind is always in fact
the brain is well built to what we call
it Quiller break to try and decide do I
come to I stay do I go do I stay you
know what are the opportunities here how
do I handle this there and so I think
we're seeing another play out of that
now well thank you thank you thank you